#summary References and links

= References and links =

 * Germplasm Documentation, Descriptors and Derived Standards. [http://www.bioversityinternational.org/index.php?id=141 URL] 
 * Multi-Crop Passport Descriptors (2001). [http://www.bioversityinternational.org/index.php?id=19&user_bioversitypublications_pi1%5BshowUid%5D=2192 URL] 
 * Generation Challenge Program (GCP) Passport Schema [http://gcpcr.grinfo.net/include/webservices/schema-documentation.php URL] 
 * Developing crop descriptor lists. Guidelines for developers. Bioversity International (2007). Available from Bioversity International and Google Books 
 * EURISCO Descriptors (2003) [http://www.ecpgr.cgiar.org/epgris/Tech_papers/EURISCO_Descriptors.pdf URL] 
 * Species Profile Model (SPM) [http://wiki.tdwg.org/SPM URL] group at TDWG. For descriptive data, trait (C&E) measurement experiment data. 
 * Moore, J.D., Kell, S.P., Iriondo, J.M., Ford-Lloyd, B.V. & Maxted, N., (2008). CWRML: representing crop wild relative conservation and use data in XML. BMC Bioinformatics, 9: 116. [http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/547/ URL] [http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-9-116 URL]
 * Kell, S.P., Moore, J.D., Iriondo, J.M., Scholten, M.A., Ford-Lloyd, B.V. and Maxted, N., (2008). CWRIS: a tool for managing and accessing crop wild relative information. In: Maxted, N., Ford-Lloyd, B.V., Kell, S.P., Iriondo, J., Dulloo, E. and Turok, J. (eds.) Crop Wild Relative Conservation and Use. Pp. 469-489. CAB International, Wallingford. 
 * Automatic links to other wiki pages


= TDWG 2009, working session on the DwC =

At the TDWG 2009, Dag Endresen and Samy Gaiji convened a working session on the DwC-G and the implementation of the DwC-G in the GBIF IPT. The working session also included a more technical presentation of the GBIF IPT by Markus Döring, and a presentation of the GBIF Harvesting and Indexing Toolkit (HIT) by Kyle Braak.

Read more at [TDWG2009_DwC_Germplasm]. 