#summary EURISCO demo upgrade of network with the GBIF IPT toolkit
#labels GBIF-IPT

= Introduction =

Bioversity International and Nordic Genetic Resources Center (NordGen) developed the first draft germplasm extension to the Darwin Core. This germplasm extension was released for a wider consultation in the complete genebank community in august 2009 (http://rs.nordgen.org/dwc/). We received feedback from a much wider group of stakeholders than anticipated; and the germplasm extension proved interesting to the crop genebanks as well as the community of genebanks for wild plants and for the community for conservation of crop wild relatives in situ. This very first draft version of the extension was mostly a simple implementation in Darwin Core for the well-established so-called multi-crop passport descriptors already implemented by most genebank information systems worldwide. The implementation of these common genebank terms as a Darwin Core extension enable a closer integration of genebank datasets with relevant datasets from other domains of biodiversity information. With the assistance from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF), the germplasm extension was implemented for the GBIF Integrated Publishing Toolkit (IPT) and the Global Biodiversity Resources Discovery System (GBRDS). The germplasm extension for the IPT is essential to enable the genebanks to share their datasets in the genebank community. For example the cultivation status and cultivation history is important for the meaningful sharing of genebank datasets. 

During 2009 the first genebanks started to install and share data with the GBIF IPT. The experience from the initial uptake of the GBIF IPT by the genebanks was reported together with the Darwin Core Germplasm extension for the TDWG annual conference in Montpellier in November 2009. For 2010 GBIF has most generously accepted to support a project to support a wider installation of the IPT for genebanks in Europe. After this first test phase we will see the genebank datasets from more than 10 European countries available with the Darwin Core from a local installation of the GBIF IPT toolkit at the genebank institute. The genebanks of Europe have planned an even wider installation of the IPT as a major upgrade to the current genebank data-sharing infrastructure if this first test phase proves successful. This next phase has also been described as apart of an application for EU funding. If this EU project application proves successful and the IPT test phase (supported by GBIF) is successful we hope to see the implementation of this new toolkit for genebanks in Europe to start during 2011. This activity for genebanks in Europe has also been presented to the global community of the CGIAR genebanks. We have also proposed and discussed the support for new GBIF toolkits for the GIGA project, and in particular the GIGA project activity to build a global information system for all genebanks worldwide (Genesys).

= From the project description =



= Details =

