#summary Darwin Core Germplasm (DwC-Germplasm) Working Session REPORT

= TDWG 2009 =

TDWG 2009 Conference, Montpelier France

Organized by: Dag Endresen (NordGen/Bioversity), Samy Gaiji (GBIF)

Contributors: Markus Döring (GBIF), Kyle Braak (GBIF), Tim Robertson (GBIF)

Date: October 12, 2009

Location: TDWG 2009 conference, Montpelier, France

Keywords: TDWG, Darwin Core extension for genebanks (DwC-Germplasm), GBIF IPT, GBIF HIT, GBIF GBRDS, GIGA ALIS crop portal, SESTO information system 



= Key presentations =

    * Markus Döring presented the GBIF Integrated Publishing Toolkit (IPT)
    * Kyle Braak presented the GBIF Harvesting and Indexing Toolkit (HIT)
    * Dag Endresen presented the Darwin Core extension for genebanks (DwC-Germplasm) and the implementation of the DwC-Germplasm terms in the GBIF IPT. [http://www.tdwg.org/fileadmin/2009conference/slides/Endressen_GermplasmDwC.ppt URL] 

= Summary of session =

The Darwin Core (DwC) standard defines a set of generic core terms for primary biodiversity information. The so-called DwC extensions will add new terms for sharing of additional thematic biodiversity information. During 2009 we have developed an extension for germplasm information to the (new) DwC. The DwC extension for genebanks (DwC-Germplasm) is based largely on the current core germplasm data standard - the multi-crop passport descriptors (MCPD). Some additional new terms was also proposed for the DwC-Germplasm. The DwC-Germplasm (version 0.1) was further implemented as an application schema (extension) to the GBIF Integrated Publishing Toolkit (IPT).

The DwC-Germplasm and the implementation of the DwC-Germplasm in the GBIF IPT are essential for the germplasm community deployment of the GBIF IPT for crop gene banks. The DwC-Germplasm can be compared to the inclusion of the MCPD terms to the ABCD 2.06 standard in 2006 and the implementation of the ABCD 2.06 in the BioCASE data publishing toolkit. The DwC (and the ABCD 1.20) lacks a number of semantically unique terms essential for the sharing of genetic resources information (germplasm cultivated status classification, cultivar pedigree history, breeding event with more). Without the DwC-Germplasm terms the IPT would be valuable for sharing data with other biodiversity networks, but not for sharing data within the genetic resources community. The DwC-Germplasm allows for a very flexible and valuable means for defining these additional thematic terms for crop seed banks while maintaining maximal data integration with other biodiversity information networks. The flexible model for the implementation of the DwC extension in the GBIF IPT provides an easy and efficient data publishing toolkit implementation for data sharing in genetic resources data networks while maintaining maximal infrastructure compatibility with other biodiversity information sharing mechanisms and networks.

At the TDWG 2009, we organized a working session on the DwC-Germplasm and the implementation of the DwC-Germplasm in the GBIF IPT. The working session also included a more technical presentation of the GBIF IPT by Markus Döring, and the GBIF Harvesting and Indexing Toolkit (HIT) by Kyle Braak. 


= Key questions raised during the session =

    * Darwin Core Germplasm extension (DwC-Germplasm) terms
    * Further development of the DwC-Germplasm, additional terms
    * Improve mapping of germplasm terms to the biodiversity standards like the DwC
    * Implementation of the DwC-Germplasm in the GBIF Integrated Publishing Toolkit (IPT)
    * Technical description of the GBIF IPT
    * Relationship to the GBIF Harvesting and Indexing Toolkit (HIT)
    * Practical description of the GBIF HIT
    * Relationship to the GBIF GBRDS (Global Biodiversity Resources Discovery System) 

= Suggestions/propositions/perspectives =

    * John Wieczorek, main curator of the Darwin Core was pleased to see the uptake and integration of the core Darwin Core terms for the germplasm crop community. Johan asked if we have explored the data models for evaluation data from other biodiversity data domains. He advised to look into the current Species Profile Model (SPM) and the relation to the Structured Descriptive Data (SDD). 

    * Antonio Saraiva representing the pollinator group was interested to join the development of the DwC-Germplasm in particular on terms relevant to the pollinator campaign. Antonia wanted to know how the DwC-Germplasm development was integrated to the TDWG standards procedure and if there are plans to subject the DwC-Germplasm to a TDWG ratification process. (The DwC-Germplasm is currently not planned for a TDWG ratification process). 

    * Stephane Riviere representing ENSCONET, opened the discussion on including conservation traits in the DwC-Germplasm. For more information on these conservation traits see the EPGRIS3 wiki discussion page at: http://www.nordgen.org/epgris3/wiki/index.php/Talk:DwC_Germplasm 

    * Peter Desmet of the Canadensys opened the discussion on the GBIF IPT toolkit. The standard IPT demands heavy system resources – and the lighter IPT LITE provides only the very basic sharing of your dataset as a Darwin Core Archive. A lighter version of the IPT including a TAPIR service interface would be valuable. 

= Follow-up activities and recommendations =

The GBIF IPT is the latest and most user-friendly tool to publish biodiversity datasets. The IPT provides a natural upgrade from the current BioCASE toolkits implemented at many genebanks (in Europe and in the CGIAR). The IPT provides largely the same functionality as the BioCASE toolkit as well as a number of new functionalities. The IPT could be a very valuable tool for the Global ALIS portal under development; and for the scheduled upgrade for the established EURISCO plant genetic resources data network of Europe (EuroGeneBank/AEGIS). The IPT could likewise provide valuable for NordGen to implement in the Nordic among distributed data providers to SESTO - In particular for the national genebanks for the vegetatively propagated crops (the clonal archives). The IPT would also be a very useful tool for distributed data providers of trait characterization and evaluation data (C&E) for SESTO as well as for the ECPGR genetic resources network of Europe. Including the trait C&E data to an IPT could be a valuable tool for the data provider to check data quality as well as the tool to transform the dataset to a readily accessible format (Darwin Core Archive, DwC-A) to share these datasets with the germplasm information networks and crop portals as well as with the GBIF infrastructure. 

= Relations with the data integration theme =

The Darwin Core Germplasm extension provides a key function for integration of the germplasm crop standards and infrastructure to the TDWG and GBIF standards, infrastructure and toolkits. 

= Potential collaboration identified =

    * Kew Millennium Seed Bank expressed interest to join the development of the DwC-Germplasm in particular for terms to describe seed processing for ex situ conservation. (Michael Way, Kew)
    * The pollinator community expressed interest in the development of DwC extensions in general as well as the DwC-Germplasm specifically. (Antonio Saraiva, Universidade de Sao Paulo)
    * The ENSCONET expressed interest to see conservation traits included in the DwC-G. (Stephane Riviere, ENSCONET) 

= Unexpected outputs =

If not completely unexpected, there was more interest from other communities outside of the crop genetic resources community (PGR). Many questions related more to the process of DwC extension development and the implementation to the GBIF IPT and the GBIF GBRDS than to the term definition and data modeling of germplasm terms. 

= Relevant TDWG interest groups =

    * Biological Descriptions (BD) interest group provides an interesting forum to discuss and develop terms for the trait (C&E) data descriptions and the trait ontologies. The SDD and SPM standards are covered by the BD interest group.
    * Natural Collections Descriptions (NCD) interest group is relevant for development of metadata terms to describe the crop genebank collections and genebank institutes.
    * Observation and Specimen Records (OSR) interest group is obviously very relevant to the DwC-Germplasm activity. The Darwin Core task group is part of the OSR interest group. The DwC-Germplasm process could perhaps form a task group under the OSR interest group.
    * The TDWG Architecture Group (TAG) interest group is another very relevant group for the DwC-G process. The TAG group maintains the TAPIR standard as well as the input to the development and implementation of LSID and other persistent identifiers (PI) in the TDWG standards. 

= Links =

    * http://www.tdwg.org/fileadmin/2009conference/slides/Endressen_GermplasmDwC.ppt
    * DwC-Germplasm: http://rs.nordgen.org/dwc/ for the Darwin Core Germplasm Extension.
    * DwC: http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/ for the Darwin Core standard.
    * GBIF IPT: http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/
    * GBIF HIT: http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/
    * GBIF GBRDS: http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/
    * SPM: http://wiki.tdwg.org/SPM Species Profile Model group at TDWG (descriptive data).
    * GIGA ALIS: http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/ prototype global germplasm portal. 



= Short summary bullet points =

    * Darwin Core Germplasm extension defines unique terms for genetic resources.
    * The flexible implementation of the DwC-Germplasm terms in the GBIF IPT is essential for the deployment of the IPT for the genetic resources information infrastructure.
    * The GBIF IPT provides an easy and essentially ready to deploy toolkit for an upgrade of the genetic resources information infrastructure.
    * There remain a few minor issues of the GBIF IPT regarding stability and scalability.
          o Capacity for the indexing of larger datasets (100 000 records plus).
          o Add feature for scheduling and automatic update of datasets (from SQL data source and/or text file).
          o Add the feature for the IPT to remember mapping when updating the local IPT with a new version of the same dataset. 
    * The GBIF IPT can be deployed with minor changes to the current implemented data sharing mechanism of the European EURISCO germplasm information network. The regularly generated EURISCO standard templates (tab delimited MCPD text files) can be directly loaded (as is) to the IPT toolkit.
    * The GBIF HIT will provide an attractive alternative for aggregation of germplasm datasets.
    * The GBIF GBRDS is expected to provide an attractive registry for germplasm resources and services. 